---
layout: post
title: "Arrays"
subtitle: ""
section: arrays
---



###  1.1 Introduction

* Many applications require multiple data items that have common characteristics.
* In mathematics, we often express such groups of data items in indexed form:
ox1, x2, x3, …, xn
* Array is a data structure which can represent a collection of data items which have the same data type (float/int/char)

Consider the following examples:

**Image**<br>
Image

Suppose we have 10 numbers to handle.<br>
**Or 20.**<br>
**Or 100.**

Where do we store the numbers? Use 100 variables?

How to tackle this problem?<br>

**Arrays is the answer**

### 1.2 Using Arrays

All the data items constituting the group share the same name.<br>

int x[10];

Individual elements are accessed by specifying the index.

### 1.3 Declaring Arrays<br>

Like variables, the arrays that are used in a program must be declared before they are used.

**General syntax:**<br>

**type array-name [size];**

* type specifies the type of element that will be contained in the array (int, float, char, etc.)
* size is an integer constant which indicates the maximum number of elements that can be stored inside the array.
* marks is an array containing a maximum of 5 integers.

o int marks[5];

Examples:<br>

* int x[10];
* char line[80];
* float points[150];
* char name[35];

_If we are not sure of the exact size of the array, we can define an array of a large size. 
int marks[50]; (though in a particular run we may only be using, say, 10 elements.)_

**How an array is stored in memory?**<br>
Starting from a given memory location, the successive array elements are allocated space in consecutive memory locations.

**image**<br>

**a[i] -> is allocated memory location at address x + i*k**

**x**: starting address of the array in memory
**k**: number of bytes allocated per array element

**Note**<br>

<ul>
	<li> A particular element of the array can be accessed by specifying two things:</li>
	<ul>
		<li> Name of the array.</li>
		<li> Index (relative position) of the element in the array.</li>
	</ul>
	<li> In C, the index of an array starts from zero.</li>
	<ul>
		<li> Example: </li>
		<ul>
			<li> An array is defined as int x[10];</li>
			<li>The first element of the array x can be accessed as x[0], fourth element as x[3], tenth element as x[9], etc. </li>
		</ul>
	</ul>
	<li>The array index must evaluate to an integer between 0 and n-1 where n is the number of elements in the array.</li>
	<ul>
		<li> a[x+2] = 25;</li>
		<li> b[3*x-y] = a[10-x] + 5;
</li>
	</ul>
</ul>

**Warning**<br>
In C, while accessing array elements, array bounds are not checked.

**Example:**
{%highlight c%}
int marks[5];
:
:
marks[8] = 75;
{%endhighlight%}

<ul>
	<li>The above assignment would not necessarily cause an error.</li>
	<li>Rather, it may result in unpredictable program results. </li>

</ul>

### 1.4 Initialization of Array
<ul>
	<li><strong>General form:</strong></li>
	<ul>
	<li>_type array_name[size] = { list of values };_</li>
	</ul>
	<li>Examples:</li>
	<ul>
		<li>int marks[5] = {72, 83, 65, 80, 76};</li>
		<li>char name[4] = {‘A’, ‘m’, ‘i’, ‘t’};</li>
	</ul>
	<li><strong>Some special cases:</strong></li>
	<ul>
		<li>oIf the number of values in the list is less than the number of elements, the remaining elements are automatically set to zero.</li>
	</ul>
	<li>float total[5] = {24.2, -12.5, 35.1}; The below statement is also an equivalent.
	<li>total[0]=24.2, total[1]=-12.5, total[2]=35.1, total[3]=0,</li>
	<li>total[4]=0</li>
	<li>The size may be omitted. In such cases the compiler automatically allocates enough space for all initialized elements.</li>
	<ul>
		<li>int flag[ ] = {1, 1, 1, 0};</li>
		<li>char name[ ] = {‘A’, ‘m’, ‘i’, ‘t’};</li>
		</ul>
		</li>
</ul><br>

### __1.5 Character Arrays and Strings__
<ul>
	<li>char C[8] = { 'a', 'b', 'h', 'i', 'j', 'i', 't', '\0' };</li>
	<li>C[0] gets the value 'a', C[1] the value 'b', and so on. The last (7th) location receives the null character ‘\0’.</li>
	<li>Null-terminated character arrays are also called strings.</li>
	<li>Strings can be initialized in an alternative way. The last declaration is equivalent to</li>
	<ul>
		<li>char C[8] = "abhijit";</li>
	</ul>
	<li>The trailing null character is missing here. C automatically puts it at the end.</li>
	<li>Note also that for individual characters, C uses single quotes, whereas for strings, it uses double quotes.</li>
</ul>

**Programming Examples**<br>
**Find the minimum of a set of 10 numbers**
#code

{% highlight c %}
#include <stdio.h>
void main()
{
int a[10], i, min;
for (i=0; i<10; i++)
scanf (“%d”, &a[i]);
min = 99999;
for (i=0; i<10; i++)
{
if (a[i] < min)
min = a[i];
}
printf (“\n Minimum is %d”, min);
}
{% endhighlight %}

**Alternate version**<br>

{% highlight c %}

#include <stdio.h>
#define size 10
void main()
{
int a[size], i, min;
for (i=0; i< size; i++)
{scanf (“%d”, &a[i]);
min = 99999;
}
for (i=0; i< size; i++)
{
\if (a[i] < min)
min = a[i];
}
printf (“\n Minimum is %d”, min);
}
{% endhighlight %}

**Alternate version 2**

{% highlight c %}

#include <stdio.h>
void main()
{
int a[100], i, min, n;
scanf (“%d”, &n); /* Number of elements */
for (i=0; i< n; i++)
scanf (“%d”, &a[i]);
min = 99999;
for (i=0; i< n; i++)
{
if (a[i] < min)
min = a[i];
}
printf (“\n Minimum is %d”, min);
}

{% endhighlight %}

**Example 2 – Computing GPA**

{% highlight c %}
#include <stdio.h>
#define nsub 6
void main()
{
int grade_pt[nsub], cred[nsub], i,
gp_sum=0, cred_sum=0, gpa;
for (i=0; i< nsub; i++)
scanf (“%d %d”, &grade_pt[i], &cred[i]);
for (i=0; i< nsub; i++)
{
gp_sum += grade_pt[i] * cred[i];
cred_sum += cred[i];
}
gpa = gp_sum / cred_sum;
printf (“\n Grade point average: is %d”, gpa);
}
{%endhighlight%}
**Don’ts in Arrays**
<ul>
	<li>use = to assign one array variable to another
	oa = b; /* a and b are arrays */</li>
	<li>use == to directly compare array variables
	<ul>
	<li>if (a = = b) ………..</li>
	</ul>
	</li>
	<li>directly scanf or printf arrays
	oprintf (“……”, a); </li>
</ul>
<br>
Copying from Array a to array b
{% highlight c%}
for (j=0; j<25; j++)
a[j] = b[j]; 
{% endhighlight %}

### 1.5 How to read the elements of an array?

By reading them one element at a time
for (j=0; j<25; j++)
scanf (“%f”, &a[j]);
<ul>
	<li>The ampersand (&) is necessary.</li>
	<li>The elements can be entered all in one line or in different lines.</li>
</ul>
<br>

### 1.6 How to print the elements of an array?

Printing them one element at a time.

{% highlight c%}
for (j=0; j<25; j++)
printf (“\n %f”, a[j]);
{% endhighlight %}
<br>
The elements are printed all in one line (starting with a new line).
{%highlight c%}
printf (“\n”);
for (j=0; j<25; j++)
printf (“ %f”, a[j]);
{% endhighlight %}

### 1.7 Two Dimensional Arrays
<ul>
	<li>We have seen that an array variable can store a list of values.</li>
	<li>Many applications require us to store a table of values.</li>
	<li>The table contains a total of 20 values, five in each line.</li>
	<li>The table can be regarded as a matrix consisting of four rows and five columns.</li>
	<li>C allows us to define such tables of items by using two-dimensional arrays.</li>
</ul>

### 1.8 Declaring 2-D Arrays
<ul>
	<li>General form:</li>
	<ul>
		<li>type array_name [row_size][column_size];</li>
	</ul>
	<li>Examples:</li>
	<ul>
		<li>int marks[4][5];</li>
		<li>float sales[12][25];</li>
		<li>double matrix[100][100];</li>
	</ul>
</ul>

### 1.9 Accessing Elements of a 2-D Array

(Similar to that for 1-D array, but use two indices, instead of one)
<ul>
	<li>First indicates row, second indicates column.</li>
	<li>Both the indices should be expressions which evaluate to integer values.</li>
</ul>

Examples:
{%highlight c%}
x[m][n] = 0;
c[i][k] += a[i][j] * b[j][k];
a = sqrt (a[j*3][k]);
{% endhighlight %}

### 1.10 How is a 2-D array is stored in memory?

Starting from a given memory location, the elements are stored row-wise in consecutive memory locations.
<ul>
	<li>: starting address of the array in memory</li>
	<li>c: number of columns</li>
	<li>k: number of bytes allocated per array element
	a[i][j] -> is allocated memory location at address x + (i * c + j) * k</li>
</ul>

### 1.11 How to read the elements of a 2-D array?

By reading them one element at a time

Example
{%highlight c%}
for (i=0; i< nrow; i++)
for (j=0; j< ncol; j++)
scanf (“%f”, &a[i][j]);
{%endhighlight%}
<br>
Note:

* The ampersand (&) is necessary.
* The elements can be entered all in one line or in different lines.

### 1.12 How to print the elements of a 2-D array?

One element per line
{%highlight c%}
for (i=0; i< nrow; i++)
for (j=0; j< ncol; j++)
printf (“\n %f”, a[i][j]);
{%endhighlight%}

All elements in the same line
{%highlight c%}
for (i=0; i< nrow; i++)
for (j=0; j< ncol; j++)
printf (“%f”, a[i][j]);

The elements are printed nicely in matrix form.
for (i=0; i< nrow; i++)
{
printf (“\n”);
for (j=0; j< ncol; j++)
printf (“%f ”, a[i][j]);
}
{%endhighlight%}